---
layout: post
title: Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS)
---

 "In a period of less than five years, the
GWAS experimental design in human populations has
led to new discoveries about genes and pathways involved
in common diseases and other complex traits, has
provided a wealth of new biological insights, has led to
discoveries with direct clinical utility, and has facilitated
basic research in human genetics and genomics".

`Visscher et al. 2012`-  Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan 13; 90(1): 7–24.

-------------------------------------------


## Concepts

- Quantitative trait loci.

- Linkage disequilibrium (LD).

- Single marker regression.

- Multiple testing.

- Missing heritability.

- Population structure.

- Mixed linear model (MLM).

- Multiple genetic association studies.

### Slides

1. [Linkage disequilibrium (LD)](https://github.com/hos6236/hos6236.github.io/blob/master/classes/gwas_1.pdf)

2. [Genome Wide Association Studies](https://github.com/hos6236/hos6236.github.io/blob/master/classes/gwas_2.pdf)

3. [Multiple Comparison](https://github.com/hos6236/hos6236.github.io/blob/master/classes/gwas5.pdf)

4. [GWAS and Mixed Linear Model](https://github.com/hos6236/hos6236.github.io/blob/master/classes/gwas_6.pdf)

## Papers for discussion (by Marcio Resende)

Please find attached two papers for discussion next Tuesday (October, 3th). I believe these will re-emphasize and complement nicely a lot of the topics that were discussed so far. Please bring questions to get a nice discussion going and come prepared to explain some of the sections as well. Each student must bring three topic from the papers to be discussed during class.
So, in a piece of paper write your name and the three bullet point you want to discuss (related to the papers) and bring that to the class.

- [10 Years of GWAS Discovery: Biology, Function, and Translation](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929717302409?via%3Dihub)

- [Status and Prospects of Association Mapping in Plants](https://dl.sciencesocieties.org/publications/tpg/abstracts/1/1/5)

## PCA analysis (by Felipe Ferrão)
During class, it was brought an interesting discussion about PCA analysis and how we could use this approach to analyze the interrelationships among a large number of variables and, consequently, to correct a possible pattern of population structure. Discussion on PCA analysis, eventually, appears in forums on the internet. A nice (and funny) explanation about PCA and its importance was suggested in the following scenario:  

**Imagine a big family dinner, where everybody starts asking you about PCA. First you explain it to your great-grandmother; then to you grandmother; then to your mother; then to your spouse; finally, to your daughter (who is a mathematician). Each time the next person is less of a layman.** 

[Here](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/2691/making-sense-of-principal-component-analysis-eigenvectors-eigenvalues) is how the conversation might go. The author uses graphs to explain his thoughts. I hope this example can give you an intuitive idea, without entering in many mathematical formalities.

## Hands-on (by Marcio Resende)
 
This hands-on aims to present basic concepts underlying the use of statistical genetic methods in genome wide  association studies (GWAS). The data set presented during the class is available in the ``BGLR`` package. More information can be accessed using the following command in ``R``:

```
library(BGLR)
?BGLR
citation("BGLR")
```

- [GWAS tutorial (Single Marker Regression + Population Structure)](http://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/hos6236/hos6236.github.io/blob/master/classes/gwas_7.html) 

------------------------------

# GWAS project

- Deadline: Tuesday, October 17 at 5 pm.

The primary goal of this project is to identify which regions of the genome harbor SNPs that affect the phenotype, considering the concepts discussed during the class.  The data set is the same as that we have used during the hands-on. As in the QTL project, this data set was extensively discussed in the literature. You should take advantage of this.

In the ``BGLR`` package, the environments were labeled as ``1``,``2``,``4`` and ``5``. You can check it using the command:  ``head (wheat.Y) ``. During the lesson, we used the environment ``5`` (last column in the phenotype matrix) for the association analysis. **Each student has been assigned to an environment (1,2 or 4) that should be analyzed for his/her project** . In this [link](https://github.com/hos6236/hos6236.github.io/blob/master/classes/gwas_8.csv), you can see the environment assigned to you. If you are planning to use the codes shown in the tutorial, be sure to change the command ``Y = wheat.Y [, 4]``. This command defines the environment considered for GWAS analysis.

## Contents

### Introduction (1pt)

- An introduction about GWAS - 300 to 600 words

### GWAS analysis (6 pt)

- Material used. Describe the population and markers used.  Add a discussion considering the differences compared to our last project (QTL Mapping). Include comments about the power and resolution of the analysis. (2 pts)

- Perform the GWAS analysis considering single marker analysis **with** and **without** accounting for population structure. Use graphics to represent your results. (2 pts).

- Discuss the importance to consider population structure in GWAS analysis. Based on the literature, indicate different methods used to account for population structure. (2pt)

### Conclusion (2pt)

- Interpretation about how GWAS and these results could be used in plant breeding scenario. You can use this section to expand your knowledge, discuss advantages and disadvantages performing single marker regression, methods to improve the analysis, etc. - 100 to 300 words 

Please send the project to Ivone (idebem.oliveira@ufl.edu).
